README.md, before:

# Diffusion Language Model from Scratch

## What Is This?

A from‑scratch diffusion language model inspired by the LLaDA guidelines. This repo continues the work from my earlier `transformerLM` project, evolving the original masked Transformer into a bidirectional core while expanding it with diffusion-specific batch/noise handling and shipping supporting tools (tokenizer, dataset builder, CLI, benchmarks, logging) with clarity and readability as priorities.

## Overview

- From‑scratch model: decoder‑only Transformer LM (RMSNorm, SwiGLU, RoPE, SDPA/MHA), implemented directly with PyTorch modules.
- From‑scratch training: AdamW optimizer, cosine LR schedule, gradient clipping, checkpointing.
- From‑scratch tokenizer: byte‑level BPE training and IO, producing `vocab.json` and `merges.txt`.
- Diffusion inference: bidirectional decoding with configurable mask scheduling (steps, block length, temperature).
- Databuilder: memmap pipeline for large corpora (token counting and ID writing).
- CLI + TOML configs: consistent, simple entry points.
- Logging: console JSON or Weights & Biases.
- Distributed training (DDP): minimal wrapper with async gradient buckets, optimizer state sharding, rank-zero logging, and aggregated metrics.
- Benchmarking: tokenizer and inference throughput checks plus optional perplexity summaries.
- Profiling: small helpers for memory and runtime inspection.

## Installation

Requires Python 3.11–3.12 and PyTorch. Using [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is recommended.

- Quick run without installing the package:

```bash
# Print an example resolved config
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml --print-config
```

## Usage Examples

Entry points live in `cli/` and are driven by TOML configs in `config/resources/`.

- Train the tokenizer (BPE):

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train-tokenizer --config config/resources/train_tokenizer.toml
```

- Start model training:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml
```

- Train with DDP:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train-ddp --config config/resources/train_ddp.toml
```

Notes:
- CPU uses `gloo`; CUDA uses `nccl`. Set `[model].device` and `[ddp].backend` accordingly.
- Prefer `[logging].backend = "console"` for local runs.
- Optimizer state sharding is enabled by default in the DDP entry point to reduce per-rank optimizer memory.
- Choose the optimizer via `[optimizer].optimizer_name` (`"adamw"` default, `"muon"` experimental) while keeping the rest of the `[optimizer]` schedule knobs unchanged.
- When using Muon, configure per-group hyperparameters under `[optimizer.muon.*]` (hidden, head, embed, scalar) so each param group carries its own learning-rate range and optimizer settings; AdamW ignores those subtables.

- Generate text:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-infer --config config/resources/infer.toml
```

_Note:_ `inference.total_length` should be the final sequence length (prompt + generated tokens) and must not exceed `model.context_length`; the generated span is computed automatically as `total_length - prompt_tokens`.

- Build memmap datasets from raw text:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-make-data --config config/resources/make_data.toml
```

- Inspect effective configuration without running:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml --print-config
```

## Remote Orchestration

The `Justfile` plus helper scripts under `scripts/` provide a thin remote control plane focused on Prime Intellect hosts; set `PRIME_HOST`/`REMOTE_ROOT` to point at the target machine and path. All available recipes:
- `just bootstrap-remote` runs `scripts/bootstrap_remote.sh` over SSH to install uv/just/tmux, clone the repo, and prepare `data/`, `runs/`, and `env/` directories on the remote.
- `just data-remote` executes `scripts/fetch_data.sh` remotely to download the TinyStories artifacts into the remote `data/` directory.
- `just build-remote` syncs dependencies by running `uv sync` (with a frozen lockfile fallback) inside the remote checkout.
- `just train config=<toml> extra="<args>"` launches `scripts/run_train_remote.sh` inside a tmux session (`diffusionlm-train`) after validating Weights & Biases credentials.
- `just infer command="<cmd>" args="<extra>"` calls `scripts/run_infer_remote.sh` to execute arbitrary inference or benchmarking commands; defaults derive from `CMD_INFER`.
- `just nvitop` opens `nvitop` on the remote box for lightweight GPU monitoring (assumes it is installed by the bootstrap step).
- `just attach-train` attaches your terminal to the `diffusionlm-train` tmux session, while `just kill-train` tears it down if you need to restart.
- `just fetch run_dir=<name>` pulls a run directory from `${REMOTE_ROOT}/runs/<name>` back to the local `runs/` folder; `just list-runs` prints the remote run directory names.
- `just sync-env` uploads your local `env/wandb.env` (copy `env/wandb.env.example` and populate `WANDB_API_KEY`) so the remote training session can authenticate with W&B.

## Modules

- diffusionlm.models
  - Purpose: Core Transformer components with bidirectional self-attention for diffusion-style language modelling.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/models/transformer.py`, `diffusionlm/models/attention.py`, `diffusionlm/models/layers.py`.
    (Attention is unmasked/bidirectional by default.)
  - Notes: dtype helpers under `diffusionlm/utils/dtypes.py`.

- diffusionlm.training
  - Purpose: Training loop, loss, optimizer, schedule, checkpointing, and batching over memmap data.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/training/trainer.py`, `diffusionlm/training/loop.py`, `diffusionlm/training/optim.py`, `diffusionlm/training/schedule.py`, `diffusionlm/training/checkpoint.py`, `diffusionlm/training/data.py`.
  - Notes: `[model]` config now includes `mask_token_id`, `noise_epsilon`, and `random_trunc_prob` for diffusion-aware batching.

- diffusionlm.inference
  - Purpose: Sampling utilities and simple generation helpers.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/inference/generate.py`, `diffusionlm/inference/sampling.py`, `diffusionlm/inference/predictor.py`.
  - Notes: Inference configs provide `prompt`, `steps`, `total_length`, `block_length`, `temperature`, and `mask_id` for diffusion decoding.

- diffusionlm.tokenizer
  - Purpose: From‑scratch byte‑level BPE trainer and tokenizer IO.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/tokenizer/bpe_trainer.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/tokenizer.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/pretokenize.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/io.py`.
  - Artifacts: `vocab.json`, `merges.txt` (with optional special tokens).

- databuilder
  - Purpose: Dataset building helpers for large corpora (memmap writer, token counting).
  - Key files: `databuilder/dataset_builder.py`.
  - Usage: driven via `diffusionlm-make-data` and `config/resources/make_data.toml`.

- cli
  - Purpose: Command‑line entry points wrapping configs and orchestration.
  - Key files: `cli/train.py`, `cli/infer.py`, `cli/make_data.py`, `cli/train_tokenizer.py`, `cli/utils.py`.
  - Scripts: exposed in `pyproject.toml` under `[project.scripts]`.

- logger
  - Purpose: Pluggable logging backends (console JSON and Weights & Biases).
  - Key files: `logger/base.py`, `logger/console_logger.py`, `logger/wandb_logger.py`, `logger/noop.py`, `logger/rank_zero.py`.

- ddp
  - Purpose: Minimal DDP wrapper, optimizer state sharding, and helpers (process group setup/cleanup, broadcast, all-reduce, metric reduction).
  - Key files: `ddp/ddp.py`, `ddp/optimizer_state_sharding.py`, `ddp/utils.py`.

- benchmarking
  - Purpose: Quick throughput checks for inference and tokenizer.
  - Key files: `benchmarking/bench_infer_latency.py`.
  - Configs: `config/resources/bench_infer.toml`.

- config
  - Purpose: Typed config schemas, loaders, validation, and example TOMLs.
  - Key files: `config/train.py`, `config/infer.py`, `config/bench_infer.py`, `config/bench_tokenizer.py`, `config/io.py`, `config/schemas.py`.
  - Examples: `config/resources/*.toml`.

- profiling
  - Purpose: Lightweight helpers for memory/runtime profiling, including NVTX ranges.
  - Key files: `profiling/memory.py`, `profiling/nvtx.py`.

- utils
  - Purpose: Small shared helpers.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/utils/dtypes.py`.

## Benchmarking

- Benchmarks live under `benchmarking/` and are TOML‑driven, similar to the CLI tools.
- Use the sample configs in `config/resources/` and run the scripts directly.
- Results are logged with the `ConsoleLogger` to stdout; no files are written.

- Inference latency:
- Run: `uv run diffusionlm-bench-infer --config config/resources/bench_infer.toml`
  - Measures warmup and repeated diffusion reverse passes, logging latency, tokens/sec, and diffusion-specific metrics (steps, block length, average mask ratio). When the config includes a `[data]` section with streaming fields (`dataset_name`, `split`, `text_field`, optional shuffle settings), the benchmark can optionally stream validation tokens from Hugging Face Datasets for backward/perplexity summaries (`perplexity_*` knobs under `[benchmark]`).


## Tests

- Run tests: `uv run pytest`
- Markers:
  - `slow`: long‑running tests. Deselect with `-m "not slow"`.
  - `gpu`: requires CUDA/GPU. Deselect with `-m "not gpu"`.
- Examples:
  - Quick CPU suite: `uv run pytest -m "not slow and not gpu"`
  - Select a file/test: `uv run pytest tests/tokenizer/test_tokenizer.py -q`
  - Filter by name: `uv run pytest -k tokenizer`

## Logging

- Backends:
  - `console` (default): prints structured JSON lines with metrics like `metrics.loss`, `metrics.lr`, `metrics.grad_l2_norm`, plus optional activation/weight norms.
  - `wandb`: logs to Weights & Biases and uploads artifacts (checkpoints, tokenizer files, optional inference outputs).
- Configure in `config/resources/train.toml` under `[logging]`:

```toml
[logging]
backend = "console"   # or "wandb"
run_name = ""         # optional; defaults to timestamp
architecture = "TransformerLM"
dataset = "TinyStoriesV2-GPT4"

# Optional if using Wandb
[wandb]
entity = "your-entity"
project = "your-project"
```

- Inference logs include sampling params and truncated text:
  - Keys: `params.temperature`, `params.p`, `params.eos_token_id`, `text.prompt`, `text.output`, `metrics.latency_ms`.
- Tip (console backend): Pipe to `jq` for readability:
  - `uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml | jq -r "."`

### DDP Policy
- Rank-zero logging: only rank 0 constructs a real logger and emits logs; other ranks are no-ops via `RankZeroLogger`.
- Aggregated metrics: scalar train/val metrics are all-reduced (mean) across ranks before logging.
- Synchronized run name: rank 0 generates the `run_name` and broadcasts it so all ranks agree on the checkpoint directory.
- Checkpoints: only rank 0 writes checkpoints and logs artifacts.
- Optimizer sharding: `OptimizerStateSharding` keeps optimizer state on the owning rank and re-broadcasts parameters after each step.

## Profiling

- Tools:
  - NVTX ranges for GPU timeline annotation (via `profiling/nvtx.py`).
  - CUDA memory helpers for summaries and allocator history (via `profiling/memory.py`).

- NVTX usage:
  - Enable globally with env vars:
    - `TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX=1` to turn on annotations
    - `TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX_LEVEL=coarse|fine|verbose` to control detail
  - Example (collect with Nsight Systems):

```bash
TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX=1 TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX_LEVEL=fine \
  nsys profile -o result \
  uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml
```

- Memory helpers (Python):

```python
from profiling import memory

# Optionally record allocator history (CUDA only)
memory.start_history(True)

# ... run training or inference ...

# Snapshot/summary (safe no-ops on CPU)
ok = memory.dump_snapshot("alloc_history.json")
print(memory.summary())
print(memory.peaks())
memory.reset_peaks()
```

Commit message:

docs: rewrite data instructions for HF streaming and update fetch_data helper

README.md, after:

# Diffusion Language Model from Scratch

## What Is This?

A from‑scratch diffusion language model inspired by the LLaDA guidelines. This repo continues the work from my earlier `transformerLM` project, evolving the original masked Transformer into a bidirectional core while expanding it with diffusion-specific batch/noise handling and shipping supporting tools (tokenizer, dataset builder, CLI, benchmarks, logging) with clarity and readability as priorities.

## Overview

- From‑scratch model: decoder‑only Transformer LM (RMSNorm, SwiGLU, RoPE, SDPA/MHA), implemented directly with PyTorch modules.
- From‑scratch training: AdamW optimizer, cosine LR schedule, gradient clipping, checkpointing.
- From‑scratch tokenizer: byte‑level BPE training and IO, producing `vocab.json` and `merges.txt`.
- Diffusion inference: bidirectional decoding with configurable mask scheduling (steps, block length, temperature).
- Streaming data: Hugging Face `datasets` streaming pipeline with on‑the‑fly tokenization (legacy memmap builder retained for archival conversions).
- CLI + TOML configs: consistent, simple entry points.
- Logging: console JSON or Weights & Biases.
- Distributed training (DDP): minimal wrapper with async gradient buckets, optimizer state sharding, rank-zero logging, and aggregated metrics.
- Benchmarking: tokenizer and inference throughput checks plus optional perplexity summaries.
- Profiling: small helpers for memory and runtime inspection.

## Installation

Requires Python 3.11–3.12 and PyTorch. Using [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is recommended.

- Quick run without installing the package:

```bash
# Print an example resolved config
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml --print-config
```

## Usage Examples

Entry points live in `cli/` and are driven by TOML configs in `config/resources/`.

- Train the tokenizer (BPE):

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train-tokenizer --config config/resources/train_tokenizer.toml
```

- Start model training:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml
```

- Train with DDP:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train-ddp --config config/resources/train_ddp.toml
```

Notes:
- CPU uses `gloo`; CUDA uses `nccl`. Set `[model].device` and `[ddp].backend` accordingly.
- Prefer `[logging].backend = "console"` for local runs.
- Optimizer state sharding is enabled by default in the DDP entry point to reduce per-rank optimizer memory.
- Choose the optimizer via `[optimizer].optimizer_name` (`"adamw"` default, `"muon"` experimental) while keeping the rest of the `[optimizer]` schedule knobs unchanged.
- When using Muon, configure per-group hyperparameters under `[optimizer.muon.*]` (hidden, head, embed, scalar) so each param group carries its own learning-rate range and optimizer settings; AdamW ignores those subtables.

- Generate text:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-infer --config config/resources/infer.toml
```

_Note:_ `inference.total_length` should be the final sequence length (prompt + generated tokens) and must not exceed `model.context_length`; the generated span is computed automatically as `total_length - prompt_tokens`.

- Inspect effective configuration without running:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml --print-config
```

## Datasets & Tokenizer Assets

Training now streams data directly from Hugging Face Datasets. To prepare your environment:

1. **Grab tokenizer files** (if you don’t already have them). Run `scripts/fetch_data.sh <output_dir>` to download `gpt2_vocab.json` and `gpt2_merges.txt` into `data/` (or another path you supply). Point `[data.tokenizer]` in your configs to those files.
2. **Choose a dataset** available via `datasets.load_dataset`. Configure `[data]` with `dataset_name`, optional `dataset_config`, `train_split`, `val_split`, and the text field to tokenize. Streaming supports both public Hub datasets and local files (e.g., `load_dataset("json", data_files=...)`).
3. **Cache for offline runs**: set `HF_DATASETS_CACHE=/path/to/cache` and run training/benchmarking once with network access (or use `huggingface-cli download ...`). After the cache is populated, set `HF_DATASETS_OFFLINE=1` to force offline mode. Private datasets require `huggingface-cli login` or an `HF_TOKEN` in the environment.
4. **Shuffling**: `[data].shuffle_buffer_size` controls the streaming shuffle window; bump it up (e.g., 10_000) for better randomization, or leave at 0 to read the dataset order as-is. `shuffle_seed` seeds the buffer RNG; DDP adds the rank to keep shards deterministic and independent.

### Legacy memmap pipeline

The old `.dat` memmap builder still lives under `databuilder/` for archival conversions:

```bash
uv run diffusionlm-make-data --config config/resources/make_data.toml
```

This is no longer needed for training but remains available if you must export datasets in the historical format.

## Remote Orchestration

The `Justfile` plus helper scripts under `scripts/` provide a thin remote control plane focused on Prime Intellect hosts; set `PRIME_HOST`/`REMOTE_ROOT` to point at the target machine and path. All available recipes:
- `just bootstrap-remote` runs `scripts/bootstrap_remote.sh` over SSH to install uv/just/tmux, clone the repo, and prepare `data/`, `runs/`, and `env/` directories on the remote.
- `just data-remote` executes `scripts/fetch_data.sh` remotely to download the GPT‑2 tokenizer vocab/merges into the remote `data/` directory (streaming datasets are fetched via Hugging Face at runtime).
- `just build-remote` syncs dependencies by running `uv sync` (with a frozen lockfile fallback) inside the remote checkout.
- `just train config=<toml> extra="<args>"` launches `scripts/run_train_remote.sh` inside a tmux session (`diffusionlm-train`) after validating Weights & Biases credentials.
- `just infer command="<cmd>" args="<extra>"` calls `scripts/run_infer_remote.sh` to execute arbitrary inference or benchmarking commands; defaults derive from `CMD_INFER`.
- `just nvitop` opens `nvitop` on the remote box for lightweight GPU monitoring (assumes it is installed by the bootstrap step).
- `just attach-train` attaches your terminal to the `diffusionlm-train` tmux session, while `just kill-train` tears it down if you need to restart.
- `just fetch run_dir=<name>` pulls a run directory from `${REMOTE_ROOT}/runs/<name>` back to the local `runs/` folder; `just list-runs` prints the remote run directory names.
- `just sync-env` uploads your local `env/wandb.env` (copy `env/wandb.env.example` and populate `WANDB_API_KEY`) so the remote training session can authenticate with W&B.

## Modules

- diffusionlm.models
  - Purpose: Core Transformer components with bidirectional self-attention for diffusion-style language modelling.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/models/transformer.py`, `diffusionlm/models/attention.py`, `diffusionlm/models/layers.py`.
    (Attention is unmasked/bidirectional by default.)
  - Notes: dtype helpers under `diffusionlm/utils/dtypes.py`.

- diffusionlm.training
  - Purpose: Training loop, loss, optimizer, schedule, checkpointing, and streaming batch construction.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/training/trainer.py`, `diffusionlm/training/loop.py`, `diffusionlm/training/optim.py`, `diffusionlm/training/schedule.py`, `diffusionlm/training/checkpoint.py`, `diffusionlm/training/data.py`.
  - Notes: `[model]` config now includes `mask_token_id`, `noise_epsilon`, and `random_trunc_prob` for diffusion-aware batching.

- diffusionlm.inference
  - Purpose: Sampling utilities and simple generation helpers.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/inference/generate.py`, `diffusionlm/inference/sampling.py`, `diffusionlm/inference/predictor.py`.
  - Notes: Inference configs provide `prompt`, `steps`, `total_length`, `block_length`, `temperature`, and `mask_id` for diffusion decoding.

- diffusionlm.tokenizer
  - Purpose: From‑scratch byte‑level BPE trainer and tokenizer IO.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/tokenizer/bpe_trainer.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/tokenizer.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/pretokenize.py`, `diffusionlm/tokenizer/io.py`.
  - Artifacts: `vocab.json`, `merges.txt` (with optional special tokens).

- databuilder
  - Purpose: Legacy dataset helpers for writing `.dat` memmaps (kept for archival conversions).
  - Key files: `databuilder/dataset_builder.py`.
  - Usage: driven via `diffusionlm-make-data` and `config/resources/make_data.toml`.

- cli
  - Purpose: Command‑line entry points wrapping configs and orchestration.
  - Key files: `cli/train.py`, `cli/infer.py`, `cli/make_data.py`, `cli/train_tokenizer.py`, `cli/utils.py`.
  - Scripts: exposed in `pyproject.toml` under `[project.scripts]`.

- logger
  - Purpose: Pluggable logging backends (console JSON and Weights & Biases).
  - Key files: `logger/base.py`, `logger/console_logger.py`, `logger/wandb_logger.py`, `logger/noop.py`, `logger/rank_zero.py`.

- ddp
  - Purpose: Minimal DDP wrapper, optimizer state sharding, and helpers (process group setup/cleanup, broadcast, all-reduce, metric reduction).
  - Key files: `ddp/ddp.py`, `ddp/optimizer_state_sharding.py`, `ddp/utils.py`.

- benchmarking
  - Purpose: Quick throughput checks for inference and tokenizer.
  - Key files: `benchmarking/bench_infer_latency.py`.
  - Configs: `config/resources/bench_infer.toml`.

- config
  - Purpose: Typed config schemas, loaders, validation, and example TOMLs.
  - Key files: `config/train.py`, `config/infer.py`, `config/bench_infer.py`, `config/bench_tokenizer.py`, `config/io.py`, `config/schemas.py`.
  - Examples: `config/resources/*.toml`.

- profiling
  - Purpose: Lightweight helpers for memory/runtime profiling, including NVTX ranges.
  - Key files: `profiling/memory.py`, `profiling/nvtx.py`.

- utils
  - Purpose: Small shared helpers.
  - Key files: `diffusionlm/utils/dtypes.py`.

## Benchmarking

- Benchmarks live under `benchmarking/` and are TOML‑driven, similar to the CLI tools.
- Use the sample configs in `config/resources/` and run the scripts directly.
- Results are logged with the `ConsoleLogger` to stdout; no files are written.

- Inference latency:
- Run: `uv run diffusionlm-bench-infer --config config/resources/bench_infer.toml`
  - Measures warmup and repeated diffusion reverse passes, logging latency, tokens/sec, and diffusion-specific metrics (steps, block length, average mask ratio). When the config includes a `[data]` section with streaming fields (`dataset_name`, `split`, `text_field`, optional shuffle settings), the benchmark can optionally stream validation tokens from Hugging Face Datasets for backward/perplexity summaries (`perplexity_*` knobs under `[benchmark]`).


## Tests

- Run tests: `uv run pytest`
- Markers:
  - `slow`: long‑running tests. Deselect with `-m "not slow"`.
  - `gpu`: requires CUDA/GPU. Deselect with `-m "not gpu"`.
- Examples:
  - Quick CPU suite: `uv run pytest -m "not slow and not gpu"`
  - Select a file/test: `uv run pytest tests/tokenizer/test_tokenizer.py -q`
  - Filter by name: `uv run pytest -k tokenizer`

## Logging

- Backends:
  - `console` (default): prints structured JSON lines with metrics like `metrics.loss`, `metrics.lr`, `metrics.grad_l2_norm`, plus optional activation/weight norms.
  - `wandb`: logs to Weights & Biases and uploads artifacts (checkpoints, tokenizer files, optional inference outputs).
- Configure in `config/resources/train.toml` under `[logging]`:

```toml
[logging]
backend = "console"   # or "wandb"
run_name = ""         # optional; defaults to timestamp
architecture = "TransformerLM"
dataset = "TinyStoriesV2-GPT4"

# Optional if using Wandb
[wandb]
entity = "your-entity"
project = "your-project"
```

- Inference logs include sampling params and truncated text:
  - Keys: `params.temperature`, `params.p`, `params.eos_token_id`, `text.prompt`, `text.output`, `metrics.latency_ms`.
- Tip (console backend): Pipe to `jq` for readability:
  - `uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml | jq -r "."`

### DDP Policy
- Rank-zero logging: only rank 0 constructs a real logger and emits logs; other ranks are no-ops via `RankZeroLogger`.
- Aggregated metrics: scalar train/val metrics are all-reduced (mean) across ranks before logging.
- Synchronized run name: rank 0 generates the `run_name` and broadcasts it so all ranks agree on the checkpoint directory.
- Checkpoints: only rank 0 writes checkpoints and logs artifacts.
- Optimizer sharding: `OptimizerStateSharding` keeps optimizer state on the owning rank and re-broadcasts parameters after each step.

## Profiling

- Tools:
  - NVTX ranges for GPU timeline annotation (via `profiling/nvtx.py`).
  - CUDA memory helpers for summaries and allocator history (via `profiling/memory.py`).

- NVTX usage:
  - Enable globally with env vars:
    - `TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX=1` to turn on annotations
    - `TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX_LEVEL=coarse|fine|verbose` to control detail
  - Example (collect with Nsight Systems):

```bash
TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX=1 TRANSFORMERLM_NVTX_LEVEL=fine \
  nsys profile -o result \
  uv run diffusionlm-train --config config/resources/train.toml
```

- Memory helpers (Python):

```python
from profiling import memory

# Optionally record allocator history (CUDA only)
memory.start_history(True)

# ... run training or inference ...

# Snapshot/summary (safe no-ops on CPU)
ok = memory.dump_snapshot("alloc_history.json")
print(memory.summary())
print(memory.peaks())
memory.reset_peaks()
```
